.. _release_v1_1_0:

----------------
Version 1.1.0
----------------
*(Released: 2025-08-12)*

A feature-focused release adding a full **reliability diagram**
workflow for classification calibration, broader docs, and stronger
tests—while keeping the public API stable.

Highlights 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Feature| New calibration plotting:
  :func:`~kdiagram.plot.comparison.plot_reliability_diagram`
  for one-or-many models with **uniform/quantile binning**, **sample
  weights**, **Wilson/normal CIs**, **ECE/Brier** reporting,
  **counts panel**, and **per-bin data export**.

* |Feature| Matplotlib compatibility layer for colormaps in
  :mod:`kdiagram.compat.matplotlib` with 
  ``get_cmap``/``is_valid_cmap`` and safe fallbacks for old and
  new Matplotlib APIs.
  
New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |New| :func:`~kdiagram.plot.comparison.plot_reliability_diagram`
  (binary classification):
  
  - Multi-model overlay with shared or custom styles.
  - Binning: ``strategy={'uniform','quantile'}``, configurable
    ``n_bins``; robust handling of duplicate quantiles.
  - Probabilities:
    1D positive-class probs or 2D ``(n_samples, n_classes)`` with
    ``class_index``; optional clipping/normalization safeguards.
  - Uncertainty bands: ``error_bars={'wilson','normal','none'}``
    (95% by default).
  - Metrics on-plot: **ECE** and **Brier** (weighted when
    ``sample_weight`` provided).
  - Auxiliary counts panel (bottom) with fractional or raw counts.
  - Consistent theming knobs (``cmap``, ``color_palette``, markers,
    alpha, linewidths, grid).
  - ``return_data=True`` returns a per-model DataFrame of per-bin
    statistics for programmatic inspection.
  - API/params aligned with the rest of ``kdiagram.plot.*`` (e.g.,
    ``names``, ``show_grid``, ``grid_props``, ``savefig``).

* |New| Colormap compatibility helpers:

  - :func:`~kdiagram.compat.matplotlib.get_cmap`:
    returns a valid colormap with graceful fallbacks and optional
    `allow_none`.

  - :func:`~kdiagram.compat.matplotlib.is_valid_cmap`:
    light-weight name validator with clear error and warning paths.
    
Enhancements 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Enhancement| Internal helpers (underscored) split out within
  ``kdiagram.plot.comparison`` for clearer testing and maintenance
  (binning, metrics, CIs, style assembly, validations).
* |Enhancement| More consistent color handling across comparison
  plots (respecting explicit palettes first, then ``cmap``).
* |Enhancement| Better edge-case handling:

  - Degenerate bins, tiny/empty bins, constant predictions,
    near-boundary probabilities (0/1).
  - Safer numerical ops for ECE/Brier with weights.

* |Enhancement| Re-architected the internal colormap compatibility
  module (`kdiagram.compat.matplotlib`) for greater reliability.
  The core function `get_cmap` is now "bulletproof," featuring a
  robust cascading fallback system (`name` -> `default` -> `failsafe`)
  to ensure it **always** returns a valid colormap object.

* |Enhancement| Added a new `failsafe` parameter to `get_cmap` to
  allow specifying the type of ultimate fallback colormap:
  `'continuous'` (for `'viridis'`) or `'discrete'` (for `'tab10'`),
  making the function more versatile for different plot types.
 
* |Enhancement| ``generic_utils.str2columns`` now uses a sensible
  default split pattern when no ``regex`` or ``pattern`` is given,
  avoiding single-token outputs for delimited strings.

* |Enhancement| Quantile reshaping utilities
  (``melt_q_data``, ``reshape_quantile_data``, ``pivot_q_data``)
  emit clearer messages and respect a consistent ``error`` policy
  (``'raise'``, ``'warn'``, ``'ignore'``).

* |Enhancement| Minor consistency passes on comparison plot
  color handling to prefer explicit palettes before ``cmap``.
   
API Changes 
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |API Change| **None (backward compatible).** The new function is
  additive. Existing functions keep defaults and signatures.

* |API Change| The `error` parameter in
  `kdiagram.compat.matplotlib.get_cmap` is now **deprecated**.
  It will be ignored and will issue a `FutureWarning` if used, as
  the function no longer raises errors but instead uses a
  fallback system.

* |API Change| Added the `failsafe` parameter to
  `kdiagram.compat.matplotlib.get_cmap` to provide more granular
  control over the final fallback colormap.


Bug Fixes 
~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Fix| Minor consistency fixes in comparison plotting defaults
  (legends, grid props) to match package-wide conventions.
* |Fix| More informative warnings for unsupported/ignored options
  (e.g., unexpected colormap names, mismatched ``names`` length).
* |Fix| Resolved a critical `TypeError: 'NoneType' object is not
  callable` that occurred when an invalid colormap name was
  passed to certain plotting functions.
* |Fix| Eliminated inconsistencies in colormap retrieval that could
  occur between different versions of Matplotlib, ensuring more
  predictable behavior across environments.
* |Fix| Reduced spurious Matplotlib warnings during plotting by
  routing through the new compatibility helpers and improving
  warning categories in tests.
* |Fix| Small wording and formatting cleanups in utility error
  messages to match package-wide conventions.
  
Documentation 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Docs| Gallery: Added **Model Reliability Diagram** example 
  section in ``gallery/comparison.rst`` (with interpretation notes).
* |Docs| User Guide: Added a full **Calibration / Reliability**
  guide to``user_guide/comparison.rst`` including math, ECE/Brier
  definitions, binning strategies, and interpretation tips.
* |Docs| Completely rewrote and updated the API documentation
  (docstrings) for :func:`kdiagram.compat.matplotlib.get_cmap` and
  ``is_valid_cmap`` to reflect the new robust architecture, fallback
  behavior, and the new failsafe parameter.
* |Docs| Citation guide rewritten. JOSS software paper listed.
* |Docs| `docs/source/citing.rst` updated:

  - JOSS software citation listed first.
  - Lines wrapped at \~70 characters for readability.
  - Placeholders clarified for submitted manuscripts.

* |Docs| Cross-links and parameter docs refined in quantile
  utilities and comparison plotting pages.
  
Testing & QA 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Tests| New ``tests/test_plot_reliability_diagram.py`` covering:

  - Single & multi-model overlays.
  - Uniform vs. quantile binning; small/degenerate bins.
  - Error bars: ``wilson``, ``normal``, ``none``.
  - ``sample_weight`` paths, clipping/normalization, ``class_index``
    for 2D proba, NaN dropping.
  - ``return_data=True`` schema and values.
  - Counts panel rendering and legend text with ECE/Brier.

* |Tests| Enhanced tests for `kdiagram.compat.matplotlib` to
  validate the new cascading fallback logic, the behavior of the
  `failsafe` parameter, and the correct issuance of warnings for
  deprecated parameters and invalid colormap names.
 
* |Tests| New suites covering datasets, quantile reshaping, core
  utilities, and Matplotlib compatibility, raising overall test
  coverage.
  
* |Tests| Added:

  - ``tests/test_compat_matplotlib.py`` covering
    ``get_cmap``/``is_valid_cmap`` branches and fallbacks.
  - ``tests/test_q_utils.py`` covering melt/pivot/reshape paths,
    filtering, spatial columns, and error policies.
  - ``tests/test_generic_utils.py`` covering ``str2columns``,
    ``smart_format``, ``error_policy``, and helpers.
  - ``tests/test_datasets_make.py`` covering synthetic generators,
    reproducibility, validations, and edge cases.  
    
* |Build| Increased coverage over helpers and edge conditions.
* |Build| Initial NumPy 2 readiness via
  ``kdiagram.compat.numpy`` (shim module to ease transition).
* |Build| Coverage increased across utils, datasets, and compat
  layers; flaky cases addressed with deterministic seeds.