.. _release_v1_3_0:

----------------
Version 1.3.0
----------------

*(Released: 2025-09-25)*

This is a major feature release that introduces a new ``context``
module for standard Cartesian diagnostic plots and adds a 
suite of utilities for data preparation and mathematical scoring.
This release enhances the package's capabilities as a
complete forecast evaluation toolkit.

New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Feature| **New Classification Evaluation Module** (``kdiagram.plot.evaluation``):
  A suite of polar plots for in-depth classification model
  diagnostics.

  - :func:`~kdiagram.plot.evaluation.plot_polar_roc` and
    :func:`~kdiagram.plot.evaluation.plot_polar_pr_curve` for novel
    visualizations of classifier performance.
  - :func:`~kdiagram.plot.evaluation.plot_polar_confusion_matrix` and
    :func:`~kdiagram.plot.evaluation.plot_polar_confusion_multiclass`
    for intuitive binary and multiclass confusion matrices.
  - :func:`~kdiagram.plot.evaluation.plot_polar_classification_report`
    for a detailed, per-class breakdown of Precision, Recall, and
    F1-Score.
  - :func:`~kdiagram.plot.evaluation.plot_pinball_loss` for granular,
    per-quantile performance analysis.

* |Feature| **New Advanced Relationship Plots** (``kdiagram.plot.relationship``):

  - :func:`~kdiagram.plot.relationship.plot_conditional_quantiles` to
    visualize how uncertainty bands change with the true value.
  - :func:`~kdiagram.plot.relationship.plot_error_relationship` to
    diagnose error patterns against true values.
  - :func:`~kdiagram.plot.relationship.plot_residual_relationship` to
    diagnose error patterns against predicted values.

* |Feature| **New Feature Interaction Plot** (``kdiagram.plot.feature_based``):

  - :func:`~kdiagram.plot.feature_based.plot_feature_interaction` to
    create a polar heatmap that reveals how two features jointly
    influence a target.
    
* |Feature| **New Contextual Plots Module** (``kdiagram.plot.context``):
  A dedicated suite of standard diagnostic plots to provide essential
  context for your main analysis. This includes functions to:

  - Visually inspect forecasts against actuals with
    :func:`~kdiagram.plot.context.plot_time_series` and check for
    systematic bias with
    :func:`~kdiagram.plot.context.plot_scatter_correlation`.
  - Understand the shape and normality of forecast errors using
    :func:`~kdiagram.plot.context.plot_error_distribution` and
    :func:`~kdiagram.plot.context.plot_qq`.
  - Diagnose residual temporal patterns in errors with
    :func:`~kdiagram.plot.context.plot_error_autocorrelation` (ACF)
    and :func:`~kdiagram.plot.context.plot_error_pacf` (PACF).

* |Feature| **New Data & Math Utilities**:
  Core backend functions have been organized into new, dedicated
  modules for easier use and extension.

  - The new ``kdiagram.utils.forecast_utils`` module provides helpers
    for common data wrangling tasks, such as calculating residuals
    with :func:`~kdiagram.utils.compute_forecast_errors`, measuring
    uncertainty with :func:`~kdiagram.utils.compute_interval_width`,
    and reshaping data for analysis with
    :func:`~kdiagram.utils.pivot_forecasts_long`.
  - The new ``kdiagram.utils.mathext`` module is the home for core
    mathematical and probabilistic scoring functions, including key
    metrics like :func:`~kdiagram.utils.compute_crps` (for overall
    skill), :func:`~kdiagram.utils.compute_pit` (for calibration),
    and :func:`~kdiagram.utils.compute_winkler_score` (for interval
    accuracy).

* |Feature| **New Anomaly Plotting Module** (``kdiagram.plot.anomaly``):
  A toolkit for exploring and reporting on anomalies, designed to work with
  your favorite detection model.

  - Visualize anomaly scores over time with event markers and threshold bands.
  - Spot seasonal patterns and incident clusters at a glance with calendar heatmaps.

* |Feature| **New Metrics** (:func:`~kdiagram.metrics.cluster_aware_severity_score`)
  to compute the Cluster-Aware Severity (CAS) score and 
  (:func:`~kdiagram.metrics.clustered_anomaly_severity`) to serve as a direct 
  helper for calculating the CAS score. 


Enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Enhancement| The API for several plotting functions (e.g.,
  ``plot_time_series``) has been made flexible and explicit by
  replacing variadic arguments (``*args``) with clear keyword
  arguments (e.g., ``pred_cols: list``).
* |Enhancement| The module structure has been clarified by renaming the old
  ``evaluation.py`` to ``taylor_diagram.py`` and creating a new
  ``evaluation.py`` for classification metrics.
* |Enhancement| Added ``metric_labels`` and ``higher_is_better`` parameters to
  ``plot_regression_performance`` for more flexible and intuitive
  visualization of custom metrics.
  
* |Enhancement| Smarter Polar Labels: We've improved how polar plot labels 
  are placed. Your custom settings are now applied more reliably, and text 
  rotation works consistently.

* |Enhancement| More Feature Plots:

  - plot_feature_fingerprint is now better at handling its color palette 
    and arranging legends, especially when plots get crowded.
  - plot_feature_interaction handles missing data more gracefully and 
    features a more intuitive colorbar.

* |Enhancement| Utility Polish. We tidied up some internal helper 
  functions to use the latest methods, getting rid of pesky deprecation 
  warnings and making our data scaler more stable.
  
Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* |Docs| **New User Guides**: 

  - Added a comprehensive ``evaluation.rst`` user guide
    with detailed explanations and mathematical formulations for all new
    classification plots.
  - Added a comprehensive ``context.rst`` user guide with detailed
    explanations and examples for all new contextual plots.
  - Added new ``forecast_utils.rst`` and ``math_utils.rst`` user
    guides for all new utility functions.
    
* |Docs| **New Gallery Page**: 

  - Created a new ``evaluation.rst`` gallery page
    with runnable examples and interpretation guides for all new
    evaluation plots.
  - Created a new ``context.rst`` gallery 
    page with runnable examples and interpretation guides for all 
    new contextual plots.
    
* |Docs| **API Reference Updated**: The API reference has been updated to
  include the new ``evaluation`` and ``taylor_diagram`` modules and all
  new functions.

Testing & QA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* |Tests| **Test Suite Completed**: Added comprehensive test suites
  for the new ``context``, ``forecast_utils``, and ``mathext``
  modules, ensuring high code coverage.
* |Tests| **All Warnings Resolved**: The entire test suite now
  passes cleanly with **zero warnings** across all supported Python
  versions (3.9 to 3.13). All previously skipped tests have been
  fixed and enabled, and all global warning filters in
  ``pyproject.toml`` have been removed in favor of explicit,
  local handling within the tests.
* |Tests| **Test Suite Expanded**: Added comprehensive test suites for all new
  functions in the ``evaluation``, ``relationship``, and
  ``feature_based`` modules, ensuring high code coverage
